the following content is provided under
a Creative Commons license your support
will help MIT OpenCourseWare continue to
offer high quality educational resources
for free
to make a donation or to view additional
materials from hundreds of MIT courses
visit MIT opencourseware at ocw.mit.edu
so moving to today's handout we're going
to talk about crystal field theory and
we're going to talk about how the shapes
of those orbitals can explain the
special properties of transition metals
like color and magnetism and really as I
said the transition metals have amazing
properties they can be absolutely
gorgeous they can do incredible things
they are very very useful elements I
like to think of them as the superheroes
of the periodic table they're doing all
the really spectacular stuff so today
we're going to talk about colors and
we're going to talk about whether things
are magnetic if they're paramagnetic or
diamagnetic so transition metals I
talked before about how they're useful
in biology they're also useful in terms
of their beautiful colors so in in the
old days before you generated floor
plans and drawings for buildings on a
computer you did blueprints for
something and the blue in the blueprint
is actually a transition metal complex
and also currently it's an active area
of research to design new imaging agents
to use in MRIs or to image the heart or
other things and a lot of these also
involve transition metal complexes and
the reason why they're useful say in an
MRI is because they can have magnetic
properties so scientists see these
beautiful colors it's kind of obvious
that the transition metals often have
these incredible colors and they can put
the transition metals in something with
a magnet and see that they have magnetic
properties so these things were obvious
and then chemists want to try to
understand why it's true why this
particular metal behaves this way or
this metal has this particular color and
they like to try to categorize them and
come up with theories that help to
explain what they're observing in nature
and so today we're going to talk about
one of those theories which is ligand
field theory and I'm also going to
differentiate that or crystal field
theory and differentiate it from ligand
field theory so both of these theories
again are an attempt to explain the
properties that we observe and the
idea behind it is pretty simple you have
a metal ion and a set of ligands around
it and if you compare the energy levels
of that free metal ion so here's a free
metal ion with that metal ion in a
coordination complex here's a quite a
pretty coordination complex the energy
levels are different that's really all
these theories are getting at that
there's a change when you bring the
ligands in around a transition metal it
changes the energy levels of those
d-orbitals and if we understand how
those D energy levels change we can
understand a lot about the properties of
that particular metal in that
coordination environment so energy
levels are altered so there's these two
theories crystal field theory and ligand
field theory crystal field theory is the
more simple one it just considers the
ionic description of the metal McGinn
bond and so we talked about ionic bonds
and mostly you're just kind of thinking
about them as these point charges and
you have plus you have minus and they
attract each other covalent bonding is a
bit more complicated start talking about
hybridization and other things like that
so crystal field theory is really simple
it just considers the ionic nature and
it does pretty well it can explain a lot
but not everything ligand field theory
has the covalent and the ionic so it's a
more complete description of that metal
ligand bond but this is a more of an
advanced topic I just want to know that
that exists so if you take 503 here in
organic chemistry they'll talk more
about ligand field theory in this class
we're just gonna do crystal field theory
but I like crystal field theory because
I like it when something that's pretty
simple theory can explain a lot I think
a lot of nature can be explained by this
so if you really want to understand
particular properties of a specific
compound you probably want a more
complicated way to think about it but if
you in general you just want to say why
are some cobalt complexes can be so many
colors crystal field theory works really
well for that
all right so crystal field theory very
simple idea behind this it's almost
disappointing I think but it's okay cuz
you can go music yeah we're studying you
know crystal field theory in class yeah
you don't have to tell people that it's
a really very simple idea so the idea is
that the ligands are negative point
charges they're like this big blob of
negativity and those ligands with their
lone pairs they're negativeness or
negative charge they got those extra
lone pair electrons are going to be
repulsive to those d-orbitals negative
point charges you bring D orbital and
the lone pair and there's some repulsion
that's basically it negative point
charge repulsion that's all that you
have to think about with crystal field
theory so it sounds it sounds really
impressive to tell people you're doing
crystal field theory and you can neglect
to mention that it's just a really very
very simple idea that sort of negative
charges repel each other that's really
all it is all right so we're gonna talk
first about the octahedral case and then
we're gonna get into some other
geometries on Friday so that's going to
be exciting but for here's our
octahedral molecule and here we have it
here and I can think about the metal in
the middle M to the N plus so this just
indicates that's any metal and to the
oxidation number and the black balls
here are the ligands and we can think of
those as negative point charges so here
we have drawn sort of this octahedral
shape around the metal in the middle and
we can think about these NH 3 groups as
these negative point charges so these
thoughts here are negative point charges
and so now if we think about the shapes
of the D orbitals again that we just
looked at we can look over here and say
wow some of those ligands that are those
negative point charges are basically
right there up against that D orbital
pointing directly toward the D orbital
so that's going to be
repulsive at the point charge is right
there next to the d-orbital this also
has a point charge kind of right toward
it along Z but these the point charges
are on axis just octahedral you have
your ligands along Z along absent along
Y but these sets of orbitals the
negative point charges aren't pointing
directly at the D orbitals so one can
think about the fact that these are not
going to be not as much repulsion this
is a lot of repulsion all right so let's
go through orbital set by orbital set
and consider how repulsive it's going to
be compared to the other orbitals ok so
if we look over here the octahedral case
and I have both these these drawings
were on the first page your handout this
is on the second page but you can think
about them here it's drawn more where
they're all drawn kind of the same way
here it's sort of moved a little so you
can see better so we can keep both of
these in mind so again the negative
point charges around the orbitals here
and on these drawings I have these
little negative signs pointing in to
give you a sense of where those negative
point charge ligands are coming so we
have our DZ squared and we can see the
negative point charge right toward this
maximum amplitude along Z so that's
going to be repulsive DX squared Y
squared
same thing point charges right toward
these so the ligands point directly at
DZ squared and DX squared minus y
squared so there's a large repulsion
there and in this particular case in the
octahedral case what turns out to be
true on both of these are destabilized
and they're destabilized actually by the
same amount and so that means that they
have the same energy which we learned
before means that there you could say
they're degenerate with respect to each
other so both of these big repulsion
both are destabilized by those negative
charges by the same amount and you have
much more repulsion and much more
destabilization
for these two orbitals compared to the
other set of orbitals the ones that are
45 degrees off-axis so now let's look at
these and look at where the point
charges are so this is the picture in
your handout I just kind of put these up
there too so you can think about where
those point charges are for octahedral
geometry so the ligands again now are
not pointing right at the the orbitals
they are off axis because the ligands
are on-axis and the orbitals are off
axis so they're not directly pointing
toward each other and so this is a lot
less repulsive than the other situation
where you have the ligands and the
orbitals both on axes pointing right
toward each other so now this is why
it's important to know which orbitals
are 45 degrees off-axis because we now
can think about the fact that there'll
be less repulsion in this case so we can
say then that D XY Y X Z and Y Z
orbitals are stabilized compared to D Z
squared and DX squared minus y squared
orbitals and they're also stabilized by
the same amount so these are also
degenerate with respect to each other
they have the same energy all right so
we have these now two sets of orbital
types what two orbitals that are
destabilized and three orbitals that are
stabilized compared to them so now let's
draw draw what's known as an octahedral
crystal field splitting diagram and
think about what's happening so I have
some over there ignore those for now I'm
gonna draw one over here so first we
have energy going up and we have a
situation we first want to think about
what would be the case say if you had
ligands everywhere not just on the axis
not octahedral geometry but just
everywhere so if you had ligands
everywhere you would have your 5 D
orbitals wall would have the same energy
because all of them
there's ligands everywhere all of them
would be experiencing the same amount of
repulsion so this would be the case for
a spherical crystal field and I like to
think about this with this prop I had
this before as an s-orbital it's
convenient for that as well but really
what it is is a hypothetical spherical
crystal field because these are all
little ligands and you can see these
little ligands are completely symmetric
around and if you feel sort of the
inside there's something in there well
that of course is a metal ion and these
ligands are completely around so all the
D orbitals are equally feeling the
repulsive effects of these ligands and
so they all have the same energy in this
hypothetical case I was so excited when
I found this at CBS and I went up and I
was like wow you sell hypothetical
spherical crystal fields here and the
person was not amused okay so now what
happens because this is not the case
this doesn't exist this is just
hypothetical it looks like it exists but
it doesn't this is what really exists
you have certain geometries the ligands
come together with the metal in form
particular geometries and we already
talked about what those geometries are
you know there's not a whole lot of
variation we get the same kinds of
geometries an octahedral is the most
common geometry for a transition metal
complex so what's going to happen here
so the ligands will now split the energy
of the D orbitals and three of them are
going to go down in energy they're going
to be stabilized compared to the two
that go up in energy so the three that
go are stabilized again Rd X Y D Y Z and
D X Z if you can't read this it's all
should be in your handout so it's okay
you don't have to read my handwriting
and just kind of just follow along and
your notes
and then the ones that have the most
repulsion are d x squared minus y
squared and D Z squared up here all
right so to go up in energy there's more
repulsion three go down in energy and
instead of writing all of those d's and
X's and Y's their little abbreviations
that people use so they call these two
orbitals the e G orbitals so those are
the ones that are destabilized and the
ones that are stabilized are called T 2g
orbitals which is going to make our
nomenclature easier later on okay these
two again same energy I tried to draw a
straight line between them they're
degenerate with respect to each other
these three of the same energy again
and then the difference of how much it's
being split this energy difference has a
special name it's sort of this Delta sub
oh and this is the octahedral and that's
the O the O is octahedral crystal field
splitting energy because it's the energy
that shows the splitting of the crystal
field so that's at least a good name for
it all right now over all this energy is
going to be conserved so the orbitals
that go that are destabilized and to go
up and three go down so we can also put
that the two that go up go up by
three-fifths times the octahedral
splitting energy and the three that go
down are stabilized go down by minus 2/5
times the octahedral crystal field
splitting energy this is why I have it
in your notes because you can't really
read my writing too well so to go to are
destabilized up by
three fists three are stabilized down by
two fists in energy all right so now
what controls the overall size of this
splitting energy how do you know is it a
small splitting is this you know should
I've drawn this that they're just tiny
bit or is it like could it be a really
large splitting what determines the
splitting of the magnitude of this
splitting energy so what determines that
are the nature of the ligands so some
ligands are really repulsive big
splitting others you barely notice
they're they're very little splitting
there's always some splitting but it can
be different so the relative ability of
a ligand to split the crystal field
gives rise to what's known as the
spectrochemical series so it's the
relative ability of common ligands to
split the energies of these D orbitals
and this is what gives rise to these
beautiful colors so all of those colors
are possible from cobalt compounds every
single one of them because different
ligands will split the energy different
amounts giving rise to those different
colors so we have what's known as strong
field ligands and as that name would
suggest strong field ligands are gonna
have a large spinning they're very
strong they have split to a large degree
and we have weak field ligands weak
field don't cause much of a splitting
it's a small Delta sub o small
octahedral crystal field splitting
energy all right so which common ligands
fall into which categories here is the
list that we talked about pretty much in
this class I don't think there are any
other ones so what I will put on your
equation sheet your equation sheet for
exam four is lots of cool interesting
things that were not on the other
equation sheets and I will tell you
which our weak field in which our strong
field but I will not tell you that week
four
means that it's a small splitting that's
something that you need to know or that
strong field means it's a large
splitting but I will tell you that your
halides down here are weak field ligands
water and hydroxide are sort of in the
middle and they can have all sorts of
different colors when they're bound to
coordination complexes they're sort of
intermediate and then your strong field
ligands with your strongest being
cyanide very strong field ligand all
right so if your metal has a weak field
intermediate field or strong field
ligand it can have very different
properties especially very different
colors also it could be paramagnetic or
diamagnetic depending on this so let's
take a look at two different iron
complexes we have iron with six waters
with a +3 charge and iron with cyanide
with six cyanide and a -3 so the first
thing we have to do is figure out the
oxidation number of the iron and the D
count and that's our first clicker
question
alright let's just take 10 more seconds
okay there we go there's the right one a
little more people say that all right so
let's take a look at this and you will
get used to thinking about what the
charges are on the various ligands so
here we know that the overall charge has
to be the same as the overall charge on
the complex water is neutral and so that
means this iron has to be +3 cyanide has
a minus charge and you may have noticed
that in the list of ligands that it was
CN minus that when I just showed you the
strong field ligands so there's six
minus ones and so it's also plus three
to give you an overall charge of minus
three and as you do these problems and
problem sets you'll become very familiar
with what the charges of the different
ligands are so overall plus three 8
minus 3 is 5
it is a d5 system so the next thing
we're going to do is we're going to draw
our octahedral crystal field splitting
diagrams and place electrons and I
already have over here a starting place
for those so we're doing here our d5
system and we have a diagram with a
small splitting and one with a large
splitting so with the small splitting is
that going to be a weak field or a
strong field that would be a weak field
and when we have a large splitting that
is a strong field ok so which of our two
compounds is going to be the weak field
compound and which will be the strong
let's do strong first which one has a
strong field ligand cyanide one so this
one is going to be our cyanide complex
because it has the strong field
so this one would be the water waters
intermediate so you kind of have to see
what the comparison is first before you
decide
oops six bracket three plus okay so here
we have water there we have cyanide so a
weak or intermediate feel versus a
strong field all right now we need to
put electrons in here so I have to
decide have five electrons I'm going to
play with and I could put them in here
let's just start here do one two three
now the question is where am I going to
put four am I going to put four down
here or put it up here and so here it
depends on if I put it down here I'm
pairing and you know the the seats on
the bus people don't really want to sit
together if their empty seats now their
empty seats up here so the question is
is it going to be take more energy to
pair or more energy to put it up here
now if this is a weak field which it is
then that's not all that far away you
get on the bus and you see a seat in the
back you'd rather sit up front but
you're like then you have to sit with
someone so you go to the back so that's
what happens with a weak field the other
energy levels are just not that far away
so you go up there and if I kind of put
this up move it up for just a second and
then I'll say so this rule here and I'm
gonna kind of cover this up again but
maybe I'll just put it down here this is
in your notes so here the octahedral
crystal field splitting energy is less
is less than we call PE which is pairing
energy so it's it's it's not that far
away you just put them singly to the
full extent possible before you pair so
that's what happens with a weak field
and we also can think about how we're
putting in our electrons parallel we're
not putting them in all sorts of
different directions and we're not if we
do pair we're
not parent we're gonna pair someone's up
ones down so all the rules that we
learned earlier are going to apply here
so this is good good review so now in
this case we can put in our first three
electrons and what do you think do you
think I'm gonna pair or do you think I'm
gonna go up there what do you think I'm
gonna pair yeah I'm definitely gonna
pair so I'm gonna put my other two over
here so in this case the pair the the
octahedral crystal field splitting
energy it's so much fun to say that so
many times is greater than the pairing
energy and so in this case there might
be empty seats but maybe it's a long
train and there's a you could sit in car
one with someone else or carry all your
luggage and why did you bring so much or
just going home for Thanksgiving all the
way 23 cars later to an empty seat in
the back you're just not going to do it
that you don't have enough energy you'd
rather sit with somebody up front so how
you put in electrons depends if it's a
weak field or strong field it depends on
whether it takes just a little bit of
energy and it's worse to pair or it
takes a huge amount of energy there's a
big splitting a really strong field and
in that case you're gonna pair first and
you're only gonna put electrons up here
when you're completely done here all
right so now we have placed our
electrons we've talked about pairing
energy and we've talked about the weak
and strong fields and now we can talk
about some notation because there's
always notation so this is what we've
done already and now we're going to do
step e which is to our D to the N
electron configurations every diagram
there's different configurations every
time so this one we do using those
little kind of cool terms I told you
about so instead of writing I have one
electron in D XY one electron and D XZ
and one electron in D Y Z
I can just say I have three in the TG t
2g set of orbitals so that is a lot more
convenient so you would just say T 2g 3
and I have 2 up here so eg 2 and that's
how you would do this I think this is
our last configuration for electrons in
a diagram that you're going to that
you're going to be that you're going to
be learning there's a lot of them ok so
then over here we would just say we have
five all in the lower energy set all in
our T 2g alright one other thing
Part F that you can be asked about which
is the crystal field stabilization
energy not to be confused with the
crystal field splitting energy they both
start with an S so I don't know why you
wouldn't be confused by that
but if you can try to remember it that
would be awesome
it's often abbreviated CF s e and this
is the energy change that's due to going
from this hypothetical spherical crystal
field where all the D orbitals have the
same energy and if you put your
electrons in here where they'd all have
the same energy to the diff energy
difference when you're placing energies
when you're placing the electrons in
lower energy orbitals or higher energy
orbitals so you're thinking about how
much more stabilized as the system if
all of the electrons are down here
that's going to be stabilized compared
to where they were here but if a lot of
them are up here then the state there'd
be less stabilization due to this
splitting all right so let's look at how
we would write that so we have three
electrons that are down in energy and
they are down in energy by minus 2/5
times the octahedral crystal field
splitting energy and that's because the
overall energy is maintained 3 go down
in energy so that's minus 2 to go up in
energy again plus 3 and then we have to
elect
Tron's up here so two times plus
three-fifths again times the octahedral
crystal field splitting energy and so
overall our stabilization is zero
there's no stabilization of this system
compared to the system here because
three electrons are down at energy into
are up alright so now you might imagine
that this is going to have some extra
stabilization and you would be right so
we would write this like this we'd say
there are five electrons down stabilized
in the lower energy orbitals so 5 times
minus 2/5 times the octahedral crystal
field splitting energy minus 10 fifths
times the octahedral crystal field
splitting energy and sometimes you'll
also see kind of a little truth that
there's also some energy kind of due to
this pairing so you might see an
indication that there's pairing energy
for two sets of electrons so sometimes
that's included sometimes it's not the
questions will ask to indicate you know
how many kind of sets of electrons ended
up being paired for that stabilization
all right so we can think about again we
have these this nomenclature here and we
can think about the stabilization so
there's a big difference between these
iron compounds one there's no
stabilization due to the splitting and
the other one there's quite a bit
because all the electrons ended down in
the lower energy orbitals so now it's
time to try some of these on your own
see if you got the rules down and let's
try some clicker questions clicker
question one
okay ten more seconds
yeah all right yes so the trick here is
to remind yourself what weak field meant
and in this case if it's a weak field
that meant that you place all the
electrons singly there are seven of them
to the fullest extent possible before
you pair you still have to pair but but
here you put more you fill these up
before you paired and this is a strong
field diagram where you put you paired
all of them possible before you put any
of them up here and to make it harder I
made drew them the same so you have to
really pay attention to what weak field
meant but this would be the version of
the strong field and this is just wrong
so you wouldn't have more electrons up
in the higher energy orbitals for really
any reason whatsoever okay so let's try
the next one
alright let's just take 10 more seconds
and we'll mention hi hi spin and we'll
do this problem
yeah people did very well with that ok
so I forgot to mention that I ran out of
room to draw so I decided that was
enough
so it's in your notes though for here
and when you have a very small weak
field and you end up putting all the
electrons in singly that is also known
and I'll move this up a little bit as a
high spin and so you have a lot of
unpaired electrons in this case so that
is the maximum number of unpaired
electrons and it's easy to remember
because you know you have these spins
there's a lot of spins there are a lot
of single spins and they're also high up
and this is a low spin case when you
have a strong field because you like to
pair first before putting them singly so
this is going to give you the minimum
number of unpaired electrons so high
spin weak field low spin often comes
from a strong field so it's about
whether you have maximum number of
unpaired electrons which you do with a
weak field high spin minimum number
alright so let's look at this one then
so it's a high field one so that means
that you're going to have the maximum
number of unpaired electrons so this
would be our diagram here and I can put
that over here and so then you have to
figure out how to write that
and so you would have three ones down in
energy minus 2/5 times the octahedral
crystal field splitting energy and you
would have one electron up by 3/5 times
the octahedral crystal field splitting
energy so minus 6 plus 3 is minus 3/5
times the octahedral crystal field
splitting energy
so this problem required you to know
what high-spin was then correctly
identify the weak field diagram and then
figure out the crystal field
stabilization energy so that was
actually quite good and maybe you'll
remember the high spin low spin
definitions as well okay so let's let's
just do one more thing and and then
we'll because we've just been talking
about high spin so back to our compounds
we're going to talk about magnetism and
then we're going to come back next time
and talk about color and we have some
cool demos for color which we'll do next
time but before we leave from this our
iron compounds we want to think about
whether they're paramagnetic which is
attracted by a magnetic field or
diamagnetic repelled by a magnetic field
and we've already talked about this in
this class so based and here are iron
diagrams again based on these diagrams
would you expect these to be
paramagnetic or diamagnetic paramagnetic
and that was because it has what kind of
electrons unpaired right so here you
just have to remember your definition of
paramagnetic it has unpaired electrons
now normally things with a weak field
and our high spin are going to be more
likely to be paramagnetic have unpaired
electrons things that have a very strong
field and so you pair first before you
fill up minimum number low spin minimum
number of unpaired electrons are more
likely to be diamagnetic
but in this case we didn't have enough
electron so they're still both
paramagnetic alright so we'll stop there
and we'll come back and talk about the
colors of those iron compounds and more
colors and cool demos on Friday don't
miss fight remember Friday double
clicker competition the team that comes
in second is automatically in the
playoffs
I am but it's not ok let's just take 10
more seconds on the clicker question
all right okay let's quiet down I'd like
to see in the 85% that's good
of course it doesn't distinguish all
that much for the clicker competition
today so if we can quiet down a little
bit people can just yell out what would
this have been the correct answer to
what should the question of said for
that to be the correct answer
most men write solos Finch is the
minimum number of unpaired electrons and
so this is the low spin high spin is the
maximum number of unpaired electrons so
this is the correct diagram and C is
wrong it's not correct for either a high
or low spin because we have two
electrons here that would have the same
four quantum numbers which is not
allowed okay so let's continue on with
the lecture and we are talking about
colors so we're talking we're talking
about the colors of the two iron
compounds that we had described before
and so let's continue and when we talk
about colors we need to do a little
review and think about what's happening
when a substance gives off a color and
so when a substance whether substance is
going to absorb a photon or not to
excite an electron to a higher energy
level that then when it falls back will
admit a beautiful light we can talk
about whether a substance is going to
absorb a photon or not and it will if
the energy of that photon is equal to
the difference in that energy level so
we talked about this before exam 1 exam
2 somewhere around there and so we saw
this equation a lot that the energy
equals Planck's constant times the
frequency of the light and now we can
take that same gorgeous equation and add
a little thing to it so we can add that
that energy is going to be
to the octahedral crystal field
splitting energy and so a substance one
of these transition metal complexes will
absorb a photon of light if the energy
of that photon is equal to this
splitting difference and if it is it can
promote an electron between a lower and
a higher state so this is all the same
kind of thing that we talked about
before but now we're just applying it to
transition metals so let's think about
what's happening with our iron complex
and if we say had a low frequency of
light that was absorbed what would be
true about the wavelength would it be
long or short it would be long and how
do we know this we know this from the
fact that it's talking about light the
speed of light equals the wavelength
times the frequency so if you have a low
frequency then you're going to have a
long wavelength so law our long
wavelengths then are and this end over
here sort of our our yellow orange red
with red being our longest wavelength so
if then if we have a high frequency of
light absorbed than the wavelength would
be short to be short wavelength absorbed
and so again our short wavelengths are
down here with our shortest being the
violet wavelength all right and now the
color that you actually see is the one
that is complementary to the color that
is of the absorbed light so we're going
to think about that how big those energy
differences are whether that translates
to high frequency low frequency long
wavelength short length wavelength for
the absorb light and then the
complementary of the absorb light is the
light that we see the transmitted light
all right so let's think about the iron
complexes that we talked about and we
had a high spin or a higher spin iron
water complex water is actually kind of
an intermediate field ligand and it
absorbs low frequency or
a longer wavelength of light and so it's
going to transmit on the shorter end of
things again water sort of an
intermediate field but in this case it
was it was it's less strong than or
other one which was cyanide which is
very strong and actually these iron
water complexes can appear actually a
variety of colors if they're solid
they're more of this pale violet so
definitely a very short color wavelength
that we're seeing but in solution and
depending on the pH they can be sort of
yellowish brownish color but the strong
field ligand remember our other compound
had cyanide on it that's a very strong
field ligand and so that's going to
absorb then a high frequency it's a
strong field so you have a big energy
difference so you have a big energy high
frequency and therefore a short
wavelength so it'll transmit on the
longer end of things and this is
actually a bright orange red color so
you have a very long long wavelength
that you're observing here this
beautiful red orange it's a really
brilliant color now interestingly I
mentioned in terms of applications as
some transition metal complexes were
used to color things and I mentioned the
blue and blue print and if you take this
compound and actually add iron in a
different oxidation state to it and form
this complex that has iron +3 and iron
plus true with cyanide you actually get
the blueprint blue so the colors can be
just dramatically different depending on
what gets added to the system alright so
now let's think about it's a little sad
but things without color
so what coordination complexes would be
colorless what would be true about D the
D orbitals if you had a colorless thing
yeah what would be true
yeah they could all they could all be
degenerate so there's no splitting at
all which usually doesn't happen if
there any ligands around that's their
hypothetical spherical crystal field
which I brought with me again because I
just love carrying this through the
infinite corridor and have people look
at me but if you do have ligands around
it'll happen if all of your D orbitals
are filled or if the energy levels are
basically out of the visible range so
the transitions are not in the visible
range at all so if they're all filled so
there's no way that you can move an
electron or if you can but it's you know
it's outside the visible region alright
so now let's think about some examples
of what what transition metals would fit
into this and I'll bring up my periodic
table and will also bring up a clicker
question
alright let's just take 10 more seconds
on this
all right so we can take take a look at
this and with our periodic table we have
nickel and palladium group 10 minus 2 is
copper plus 2 Gold plus 2 11 minus 2 is
9 zinc plus 2 cadmium plus 2 12 minus 2
is 10 and so 10 would be the correct
number for our filled D orbitals they
can hold 10 electrons so if we then go
and fill this in examples would include
zinc plus 2 and cadmium plus 2 with our
D 10 system and in fact zinc plus 2 is a
very common oxidation state for zinc
many proteins require zinc many of you
have zinc and vitamin tablets some
people take extra zinc to make sure you
have enough zinc plus 2 in your body and
a lot of times people who are studying
proteins do not realize it's a zinc
containing protein because they isolate
the protein and it's clear so they don't
think it has a transition metal in it
but zinc is hiding in that protein
because it's colorless so you don't know
it's there if you purify a protein with
color with other metals it's really
obvious that the metal is there but zinc
can be sneaky cadmium can also be sneaky
cadmium for the most part is a poison to
us and they used to use it to coat
barbeque grills which is not you don't
want to put a poisonous substance on a
barbecue grill it's and then heat it up
that's a really bad idea
so if you go to a barbecue and you think
wow that grill looks like you know it's
like 70 or 80 years old or something
like that it looks ancient
maybe you don't want to eat from that
barbecue grill old they don't do this
anymore but old barbecue grills had
cadmium on it and I know someone who
actually had cadmium poisoning and it
was a really pretty terrible thing so
it's hard to diagnose that but they
finally got the right diagnosis alright
so again colorless things you don't know
that they're there but they sometimes
are alright so what about cobalt plus 3
you can just yell us out would this be a
colorless compound no so we have in our
group 9 minus 3 would be sinc would be 6
so it's not which vitamin contains
cobalt and you probably all know cuz
we've been talking about it
vitamin b12 and I just thought I would
share with you the colors of vitamin b12
and so this is crystals that contain
vitamin b12 and these are their actual
colors of the crystals so it's really
fun to work with vitamin b12 it's
absolutely brilliant except that it's
also light-sensitive so you have to work
in the dark under red light so
everything then is red because you're
under red light but if you bring them
out and you expose them to light they're
really really pretty all right so we're
gonna continue on this cobalt theme
because cobalt is one of the most
spectacular transition metals when it
comes to color and I'm going to get you
ready for a little demo and you're gonna
help me first figure out what colors you
should observe in this demo alright so
we're going to have a cobalt compound
that has six waters with it and you're
given the octahedral crystal field
splitting energy so now we want to
predict the color we want to predict the
color we're asking about what sort of
wavelength is going to be absorbed so we
can think about the wavelength that will
be transmitted so we need to think about
our equations and we can combine these
just like we did in many problems in the
earlier part of the course and so
wavelength equals Planck's constant
times the speed of light now instead of
just divided by any energy we're
dividing by the energy that's the
octahedral crystal field splitting
energy and so we can put in our Planck's
constant in our speed of light and we
can put in the octahedral crystal field
splitting energy that we were given but
we want units in meters and so we need
our joules to cancel out and in the
bottom we were given the splitting
energy and kilojoules so we need to do
some conversions so first we need to get
rid of this kilojoules so we're going to
convert it to joules then we can get rid
of our joules we also have seconds we
want seconds in our wavelength but that
is going to cancel out here and here so
we're good
but now our answer we have meters at the
top but we have moles on the bottom so
we need to use Avogadro's number to
cancel out our moles and if you don't do
that you're gonna get a really weird
number for your wavelength it's not
going to make sense it's gonna be off by
something like a factor of 10 to the 23
that should remind you you want to use
Avogadro's number here to get rid of
your per mole all right so now we have a
wavelength and yes on your equation
sheet we will give you this we will give
you the color spectrum so you don't have
to memorize this so about 500 nanometers
is in our green region over here so the
color that should be absorbed given this
octahedral crystal field splitting
energy is green so now for green what is
the complementary color of green yep so
it's going to be reddish and we have our
little drawing over here so the
predicted color would be red so let me
just now tell you about this demo and
we're actually going to see some red
color but we're also going to see
another color which is blue so in this
demo if you have start with some copper
chloride and add a lot of water lot a
lot of water hydrate it really well
you'll get this octahedral system that
you just told me was red but if you
don't add a lot of water just a little
bit of water you only display some of
the chlorides and then you're going to
have a blue system so if you have a lot
of water red and you're hydrated red if
you're more dehydrated you get blue so
we're going to now try this out and see
if it works
is it on yeah it's on great okay so
that's the cobalt flower and as Cathy
said it's we're gonna put under there as
Cathy said it's it's got some cobalt and
it's got water ligands and it's also got
chlorine and Eric's going to sprinkle it
with water now we're gonna hydrate it
hydrate it as you do when you have to
water a flower and it's turned I guess a
pinkish reddish color right can they see
that up there yeah it looks it looks
better hold it against this too I think
right so to show you that it was in fact
the water that led to this color change
we're gonna try to dry out the flower is
it working lying hot yes I am
I know it's really slow I just try to go
faster
once you hold it under the document
camera I think you can kind of see it
happening
so as there we go that's working as Eric
continues to warm this thing up the
water is evaporating and as that happens
it starts forming that hydrous chloride
complex instead of appear hydrous
complex and it's going back to emitting
or emitting blue color instead of red
and hopefully so some people give each
other roses but if your significant
other is a geek what's better than a
flower that changes color on hydration I
don't know I think this is this is a
pretty good gift Valentine's Day isn't
quite coming up but just keep it in mind
all right
so we'll leave the flower here and we'll
keep keep an eye on it as we go along
it will it will change back eventually
it depends a little on the weather but
it's pretty dry right now in this time
of year